The Project Gutenberg eBook of Anecdotes and memoirs of William Boen,
by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Anecdotes and memoirs of William Boen
       a coloured man who lived and died near Mount Holly, New Jersey

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: January 28, 2023 [eBook #69889]

Language: English

Produced by: Bob Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANECDOTES AND MEMOIRS OF
WILLIAM BOEN ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




                        ANECDOTES AND MEMOIRS

                                 OF

                            WILLIAM BOEN,

                           A COLOURED MAN,

          WHO LIVED AND DIED NEAR MOUNT HOLLY, NEW JERSEY.

                         TO WHICH IS ADDED,

              _The Testimony of Friends of Mount Holly
                  monthly meeting concerning him_.


                            Philadelphia:
                      PRINTED BY JOHN RICHARDS,
                     No. 129 North Third Street.

                                1834.




               MEMOIRS AND ANECDOTES OF WILLIAM BOEN.


William Boen was a coloured man, who resided near Mount Holly, New
Jersey. Like many of his brethren of the African race, in those
days, he was from his birth held as a slave. But though poor and
ignorant, in his early days, he was cared for, as all others are,
by the universal Parent of the human family. He became a pious,
sober, temperate, honest, and industrious man; and by this means, he
obtained the friendship, esteem, and respect of all classes of his
fellow-men, and the approbation and peace of his heavenly Father.

His industry, temperance, and cleanliness, no doubt, contributed
much to his health and comfort; so that he lived to be a very old
man, with having but little sickness through the course of his
life. His character being so remarkable for sobriety, honesty, and
peace—that it induced some younger people to inquire by what means
he had arrived to such a state, and attained such a standing in the
neighbourhood where he lived. Ever willing to instruct, counsel, and
admonish the youth, he could relate his own experience of the work of
grace in his heart, which led him into such uprightness of life and
conduct. For his memory did not appear to be much impaired by reason
of old age.

To a friend who visited him in the eighty-sixth year of his age,
he gave the following account of his early life, and religious
experience. On being asked, whether he could remember in what way,
and by what means, he was first brought to mind and follow _that_,
which had been his guide and rule of faith and life, and which had
led and preserved him so safely along through time? William answered
as follows: “Oh! yes; that I can, right well. In the time of the old
French war, my master (for I was a poor black boy, a slave) my master
sent me to chop wood, on a hill-side, out of sight of any house;
and there was a great forest of woods below me; and he told me to
cut down all the trees on that hill-side. When I went home, in the
evenings, I often heard them talking about the Indians killing and
scalping people: and sometimes, some of the neighbours would come
in, and they and my master’s family talked of the Indians killing
such and such,—nearer and nearer to us. And so, from time to time,
I would hear them tell of the Indians killing, and scalping people,
nearer and nearer: so that I began to think, like enough, by and by,
they would kill me. And I thought more and more about it; and again
would hear tell of their coming still nearer. At length, I thought,
sure enough they will get so near, that they will hear the sound of
my axe, and will come and kill me. Here is a great forest of woods
below me, and no house in sight:—surely, I have not long to live. I
expected every day would be my last;—that they would soon kill me, a
poor black boy, here all alone.”

“A thought then came into my mind, whether I was fit to die. It was
showed me, and I saw plain enough, that I was not fit to die. Then it
troubled me very much, that I was not fit to die; and I felt very
desirous,—very anxious that I might be made fit to die. So I stood
still, in great amazement; and it seemed as if a flaming sword passed
through me. And when it passed over, and I recollected myself (for
I stood so, some time) it was showed me how I should be made fit to
die: and I was willing to do any thing, so I might be made fit to
die.”

“Thus, I was brought to mind and follow _that_, that has been the
guide and rule of my life,—_that within me_, that inclined me to
good, and showed and condemned evil. Now I considered I had a new
master—I had two masters; and it was showed me (in my mind) by my new
Master, a certain tree on the hill-side, that I must not cut down.
I knowed the tree well enough. I had not come to it yet. But I did
not know what I _should_ do; for my old master had told me to cut
all the trees down, on that hill-side. My new Master forbids me to
cut a certain one. So I thought a good deal about it. I cut on; and
by and by I came to the tree. I cut on by it, and let it stand. But
I expected, every day, my old master would come, and see that tree
standing, and say, ‘What did thee leave that tree standing for? Did
not I tell thee to cut all the trees down, as thee went? Go, cut that
tree down.’ Then, I didn’t know what I _should_ do. But he never said
any thing to me about it. I cut on, and got some distance by it; and
one day my old master brought out his axe, and cut the tree down
himself; and never said, William, why didn’t thee cut that tree down?
never said any thing to me about it. Then I thought, surely my new
Master will make way for me, and take care of me, if I love him, and
mind him, and am attentive to this my guide, and rule of life. And
this seemed an evidence and proof of it, and strengthened me much in
love, and confidence in my Guide.”

After the respectable and goodly old man, had given this interesting
account of the way and manner in which he was brought to follow the
guide of his life, the following question was put to him: “Well,
William, has thee, from that time, till now, been so careful and
attentive to thy guide, as never to say or do amiss?” To which he
replied, “Oh! no: I have missed it—I have several times missed it.”
He was then asked, “Well, William, in that case, how _did_ thee get
along?” He answered, “Oh! when I missed it,—when I found I had said,
or done wrong, I felt very sorry. I tried to be more careful, for
time to come;—never to do so any more: and I believe I was forgiven.”

Another inquiry was made of William, how he and his old master got
along together, after his change. He said, “Very well. Some time
afterwards, one of the neighbours said to me, one day, ‘William,
thy master talks of setting thee free.’ I didn’t think much about
it—didn’t expect there was any thing in it; though I heard others say
he talked of setting me free;—till, after some time, as my master was
walking with me, going to my work, he said, ‘William, wouldn’t thee
like to be free?’ I didn’t say any thing to it. I thought he might
know I should like to be free. I didn’t make him any answer about it,
but then I thought there was something in it. So after awhile, sure
enough, he did set me free.”

There is no doubt his old master observed a great change in him; for
his guide taught him to be dutiful, industrious and diligent in his
business, careful in his words and actions, and sober, steady, and
exemplary in all he said, and in all his conduct.

William Boen’s guide, and rule of life and conduct, his _new Master_,
as he called him, that did so much for him, and raised him from the
state of a poor slave, to be a free man, in good esteem—thro’ habits
of temperance, sobriety, honest industry and integrity,—whereby
he was enabled to become the respectable head of a family, and
to acquire a house, and property of his own, sufficient for the
comfortable accommodation of himself and family;—and who forsook him
not when he became old, and grey-headed;—his new Master was the same
Light that appears unto all; and it would guide every one in the
right way, as it did him, if they would take it for their Master, and
mind and obey it, as he did. It was the guide of his youth,—became
his Lord and Master,—preserved him from evil,—and conducted him
safely through the trials of life, to a good old age.

William Boen’s new Master was, and is the same thing that the apostle
Paul, in his Epistle to Titus, bears testimony to, in these words;
“the grace of God, that bringeth salvation, hath appeared to all
men;—teaching us, that, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world.” Now, surely, if we don’t take it for our master, and mind its
teachings, we cannot _know_ it to bring our salvation, or _save us_
from _all ungodliness_ and _worldly lusts_, as he did, and as all do,
that are obedient to this grace of God, _the Light of Christ, within_.

In William Boen’s simple account of the way and means, by which he
was showed how he should be made fit to die;—that is, by minding
and following _that within_ him, which inclined him to good, and
that showed and condemned him for evil,—the goodness, mercy, and
condescending care of the Almighty Father, are strikingly manifest.
How graciously he suits his dispensations to the weak and ignorant
states of his children, who sincerely seek him, and inquire what they
shall do to be saved! When William Boen thought of death, something
showed him he was not fit to die. He “saw it plain enough,” and was
troubled. In his anxiety to be prepared to die, he became still and
quiet—and then he felt condemnation, as a flaming sword, pass through
him. When this had its effect to bring him to a state of humility
and watchfulness, the Divine Light in his soul showed him the way
in which he should walk, in order to become fit to die. He became
willing to do any thing required of him: so, to prove his obedience,
it was showed him, by his new Master, that he must leave a certain
tree standing, where he was felling timber. He began to reason upon
consequences, but resolved to obey his new Master, in preference to
his old one. It was sufficient to test his faith and love; and though
a simple circumstance, it was probably of great use to him ever
after; as by it he was taught to be faithful in little things, and
thus became ruler over more.

It may be useful to survivors, who, like William, are desirous so to
live, as that they may become fit to die,—to bring into view some
anecdotes of his life, that show the principles by which his mind and
conduct were regulated.

In his conversation among men, he was very careful to keep to the
plain language,—the language of truth and sincerity—yet, through the
help of his guide, he detected himself in a deviation from it, in the
following circumstance. A wealthy neighbour, a white man, frequently
availed himself of William’s obliging disposition, by using his
grindstone, instead of procuring one for himself. On an occasion of
this kind, his neighbour told him he was obliged to him for the use
of his grindstone: to which, William returned the usual compliment of
saying he was welcome. After the man was gone, William became uneasy
in his mind, with his reply, as being insincere. He therefore went
to his neighbour, and made an acknowledgment, that although he had
told him he was welcome, yet it was only in conformity with custom,
and was not the case; for he thought his neighbour was better able to
keep a grindstone of his own, than he was.

How many customary compliments, by-words, and common expressions,
would be dispensed with, as idle words, for which we must give an
account in the day of judgment,—if a strict regard to truth and
sincerity, were the ruling principle or guide of all our words and
actions!

William Boen appears to have been as strictly careful in his
adherence to the principles of justice, and the rights of property,
as he was in regard to truth and sincerity in his communications.
Being employed, with several others, to mow the meadows attached to
the place called Breezy Ridge, on Lomberton creek,—William, with
his scythe, accidentally struck a partridge that was concealed from
his view, in the grass, and killed it. As it appeared to be in good
order, his companions proposed that he should take it home, for
his own use. William, however, was not easy to do so: he said the
partridge did not belong to him, but to the owner of the meadow.

On another occasion, he manifested the acuteness of his feelings,
in regard to the rights of property. With other labourers, he
was employed to cut timber in the pines, at a distance from the
settlements. They took provisions with them, to encamp for a week
or two in the woods; and, finding an empty cabin on lands that did
not belong to their employer, they made use of it. William’s mind,
however, was not quite satisfied. He had been using the property
of another, without leave. So, after his return, he took an early
opportunity to represent the case to the owner of the cabin, who
lived some miles distant from him.

William Boen believed in Christ, as the Prince of peace; and that
those who professed to be Christians, and lived in his peaceable
spirit, could have nothing to do with war, in any shape. He therefore
had a testimony to bear against the spirit of war, and the love
of money that stands in connexion with it. Not far from William’s
habitation, there lived a storekeeper, a man of considerable note,
who had been an officer in the army, during the time of the American
revolution. Some time after the peace was concluded, this storekeeper
traded largely in buying up soldiers’ certificates, for much less
than their nominal value. By this means, he made considerable profits
to himself, with which he engaged in building a large and fine
house. While thus employed, William Boen called on him, and told him
he had been much concerned for him, on account of his traffic in
what he considered no better than the price of blood, and that the
money with which he was building his house, was unrighteous gain. He
also quoted that passage of scripture, as applicable to the case,
respecting Judas, who betrayed his Master for the sake of money; and
mentioned the manner of his death.

His reproof and admonition were delivered with so much honesty and
tender feeling, and the kind and friendly motives that influenced him
thereto, were so apparent, that his neighbour, though a high-spirited
man, received his communication, in a respectful manner;—and, on a
subsequent occasion, upon hearing some persons remark, that they
wondered that William was not ridiculed by boys, and light, vain
persons, on account of his singular appearance, and wearing his beard
so long,—he stated, that William Boen was a religious man; and that
his well known piety impressed the minds of such people with awe and
respect towards him; and thus they were prevented from manifesting
that levity which the singularity of his dress and appearance might
otherwise have produced.

For it is to be observed, that he thought it right to have all his
clothing of the natural colours, and made very plain and simple. As
he was very clean in his person, his wearing apparel became very
white, by washing—his hair and beard also became white through age:
and these, contrasted with his dark skin, gave him a very venerable
appearance. He was affable, modest, and respectful, in his manners
and deportment; while the mildness and gravity of his countenance,
indicated a mind governed by the precepts of the gospel, and often
impressed lessons of serious reflection on those who beheld
him;—especially in the solidity and reverence, with which he sat in
religious meetings.

It was probably on account of his dress, that some person remarked to
him, that he appeared to be endeavouring to walk in the footsteps of
John Woolman,—a Friend with whom he had been intimately acquainted.
After a pause, he said, “I am endeavouring to follow the footsteps of
Christ.”

William Boen, by attending to his Guide, and faithfully following
Christ, his _new Master_, was brought to believe in his doctrine, in
relation to gospel ministers: “Freely ye have received, freely give.”
He therefore did not approve of hireling ministry, or paying men for
preaching. This testimony to a free gospel ministry, he carried so
far, in order to keep a pure conscience towards his Divine Master,
that on one occasion, after he had sold some wood to a person, who
was called a clergyman,—he felt scrupulous about receiving money from
him, which was obtained by preaching: as it would not be, in his
apprehension, bearing a faithful testimony against hireling ministry.
So he went to the man, and asked him whether he got his money by
preaching. On being answered in the affirmative, William told him,
he was not free to take his money in pay for the wood, as he did not
approve of making money by preaching, contrary to the command of
Christ.

Yet his mind was clothed with Christian charity towards his
fellow-creatures, who had not been brought to see and walk in the way
which he apprehended to be required of him. William was not free to
use any thing either in food or clothing, that he knew to be produced
through the labour of slaves. On its being asked him, whether he
thought so well of his friends that used the products of slavery,
as he would do, if they did not use such articles; he replied,
“_Obedience is all, with me._ I believe it is required of me, not to
use these things: and if it has never been required of them, not to
use these things, then they are as much in the way of their duty, in
using them, as I am in the way of my duty, in not using them.”

When William was drawing near the close of his long and exemplary
life, his bodily powers failed through weakness, and the decay of
nature; but his mind was preserved clear and tranquil. At this
season, he was frequently visited by a friend, who, on one occasion,
made some remarks respecting the calm and peaceful state of mind,
which he appeared to enjoy, and inquired of him by what means he
had attained to such a happy state. William, in accordance with his
common expression of trying all things by the mind, gave this short
and comprehensive answer: “By keeping the mind easy,—and resisting
every thing that made it uneasy.”

Soon after his death, the following obituary notice, appeared in one
of the public papers:

“Died, near Mount Holly, on the 12th instant, in the ninetieth year
of his age, William Boen, (alias Heston) a coloured man.”

Rare, indeed, are the instances that we meet with, in which we feel
called upon to record the virtues of any of this afflicted race of
people. The deceased, however, was one of those who had demonstrated
the truth of that portion of scripture, that “of a truth God is no
respecter of persons; but in every nation, they that fear him and
work righteousness, are accepted with him.”

He was concerned in early life, “to do justly, love mercy, and walk
humbly with his God;” and by a close attention to the light of Christ
within, and faithfully abiding under the operation of that blessed
spirit of Divine grace in his soul, he was enabled, not only to bear
many precious testimonies faithfully, to the end of his days, but
also to bring forth those fruits of the spirit which redound to the
glory of God, and the salvation of the soul. He was an exemplary
member of the religious Society of Friends; and as he lived, so he
died,—a rare pattern of a self-denying follower of Jesus Christ. He
had no apparent disease,—either of body or mind; but, as he expressed
himself a short time before his death, he felt nothing but weakness:
which continued to increase, until he gently breathed his last; and
is, no doubt, entered into his heavenly Father’s rest.

“Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that
man is peace.”

_6th month, 1824._

       *       *       *       *       *

 _Memorial of Mount Holly monthly meeting of Friends, concerning
   William Boen, a coloured man. Read in the Yearly Meeting of
   Friends, held in Philadelphia, 1829._

As the memory of those who have followed the leadings of that Teacher
which leadeth into all truth, and enables its votaries to become, by
example, preachers of righteousness, is precious, we feel engaged to
give the following testimony concerning our deceased friend, William
Boen, a coloured man.

He was born in the year 1735, in the neighbourhood of Rancocas. Being
a slave from his birth, he had very little opportunity of acquiring
useful learning; yet by his own industry and care, he succeeded in
learning to read and write.

His mind became seriously impressed while very young, and he was
induced in early life, to attend to the monitions of light and life
in his own mind, being convinced from what he felt within him, of
the existence of a Supreme Being; and also of the manner of his
visiting the children of men, by the inward peace which he felt upon
a faithful performance of what he thus apprehended to be his duty.

About the twenty-eighth year of his age, he contracted for his
freedom; and having entered into marriage engagements with a woman
in the neighbourhood, but not being, at that time, a member of our
society, he was straitened in his mind how to accomplish it; as he
was fully convinced of our testimony in that respect.

In this difficulty, he made known his situation to our friend, John
Woolman, who, to relieve him, had a number of persons convened at
a friend’s house, where they were married after the manner of our
society, and a certificate to that effect, furnished them by those
present.

About this time he made application to become a member of our
society; but way not opening in Friends’ minds, he was not received,
but encouraged to continue faithful; which we believe he did, from
the account we have of nearly his whole life.

He was concerned above all things, to walk in the path of truth and
righteousness; and according to his measure, to be faithful to every
opening of duty, by which means he obtained the esteem of all who
knew him.

As he thus continued steadfast to the light in his own mind, he
was favoured to see the necessity of a daily cross to all the
gratifications of self, and that the cause of truth cannot grow in
us, while we are governed by a worldly spirit.

By yielding full obedience to that light, which it was his chiefest
joy to follow, he became truly convinced of the necessity of
maintaining the various testimonies which we, as a people, have
been called upon to bear; and, in some respects, he had to bear a
testimony against things in which many of his white brethren indulge,
particularly in regard to slavery; refusing to wear, or use in any
shape, articles which come through that corrupted channel. And, we
believe, it was through dedication to the Lord, and an unreserved
surrender of his will, to the Divine will, that he was brought to see
these things in that light which deceiveth not. Thus, evincing by his
conversation and example, the truth of that scripture declaration,
“All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the
peace of thy children; in righteousness shalt thou be established.”

It appears, not only from his own words, but also from his weighty
example, that his great concern was to keep his mind easy, believing
that right and wrong actions would result either in peace or pain
within; hence, his great care was to “try all things by the mind,”
as he expressed it, or the light of Christ within; with which he
was, no doubt, through faithfulness, in a remarkable manner favoured;
esteeming it right to be obedient to every manifested duty, however
in the cross, or insignificant to the carnal mind, these small duties
might appear; and as he was found, like the servant in the parable,
“faithful in the little,” he was strengthened to rule over the carnal
propensities of his nature, bringing his words and actions into the
obedience of Christ. His humility was such, that although in low
circumstances, he appeared to be content, and even refused to indulge
himself in rich food or clothing, saying that “bread and water was
good enough for him.” In 1814, he was, on application, received into
membership with us, and continued to the last, when able, a steady
attender of our meetings, both for worship and discipline.

He enjoyed reasonable health and strength until about his
eighty-seventh year, when his strength began to fail, but the
faculties of his mind remained good until his end.

Some weeks previous to his death, he spoke of it with the utmost
composure, and recounting his past trials and experiences said,
“he had thought he was alone with regard to his testimony against
slavery.” But, as though he had fresh evidences thereof, said, “he
believed it would grow and increase among Friends.” He appeared
perfectly resigned to death, having no will therein; and as he
expressed himself, “that some died hard and others easy, but for
himself, he had no wish for either, being fully resigned to the
Divine will in all things.”

To a friend present, the day previous to his death, he stated
“that he felt himself going very fast; but that he had no wish to
stay.” His weakness increasing, and having no desire to take any
nourishment, he was asked if he was sick, or felt any pain; to which
he answered, “that he felt neither pain nor sickness, but weakness,
and a total disrelish for every thing of this world.” His weakness
continued to increase until he passed quietly away, on the night of
the 12th of the 6th month, 1824, in the ninetieth year of his age;
and we doubt not, he has entered into his heavenly Father’s rest.

Read in, and approved by, Mount Holly monthly meeting of Friends,
held 11th month 6th, 1828.

                                                 AMOS BULLOCK, Clerk.

Read in, and approved by, Burlington Quarterly meeting of Friends,
held at Chesterfield, on the 25th of the 11th month, 1828, and
directed to be forwarded to the Yearly Meeting.

                                            ANDREW C. RIDGWAY, Clerk.




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 5 Changed Then, I did’nt to: didn’t
  pg 6 Changed did’nt to: didn’t in 4 places
  pg 6 Changed William, would’nt to: wouldn’t
  pg 13 Added ending quote after: a coloured man

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANECDOTES AND MEMOIRS OF
WILLIAM BOEN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
